=head1 NAME

ao - audit, analyze, and optimize software build procedures

=head1 SYNOPSIS

ao [<options>] { run <prog> | <action> } [args...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<AO> system C<injects> the capacity for I<auditing>, I<avoidance>,
and I<recycling> into any I<build tool>. It is a system for
auditing builds and treating each command within them as a black box,
recording each file consumed (along with its associated metadata such as
size/date/checksum/version) as well as each file modified. Contents of all
modified files may be stored such that the audited command can be
replayed automatically by simply copying back the output files from the server,
a process known as I<recycling>.
B<AO> has a number of uses including build analysis, build optimization, and
server provisioning (i.e. ensuring that the set of input files on a new build
server is identical to the set on the old machine).

=head2 Definitions

=over 4

=item Build Tool

A B<build tool> is any program which takes input exclusively from some
combination of files, command line options, and environment variables,
and I<deterministically> produces a set of output files.  Deterministic,
as used here, means that identical inputs are guaranteed to produce
I<semantically identical>[*] outputs. Though classic build tools such
as compilers tend to fit these criteria by definition, any program or
script which does so may be considered a I<build tool>.

[*] Some build tools are known to insert date or version stamps
into their output and thus will not create bit-for-bit identical
output.  These results may still be considered I<semantically>
identical because they do not affect the behavior of the result.
AO knows how to ignore embedded datestamps in certain common
file formats including .zip and .jar files, Windows binaries
(.exe, .dll, and .obj), and archive files (.a on Unix, .lib on
Windows).

=item Auditing

B<Auditing> is the act of recording the vital statistics of all
I<involved files> for a particular invocation of a I<build tool>.
For an individual program this set may be subdivided into an I<input>
(read) set and an I<output> (modified) set, while for a scripted sequence of
programs comprising a typical I<build tool> the output set of one program
may be part of the input set of a later one. It is axiomatic that
multiple audited runs of the build tool with the same
inputs will produce not only identical outputs but identical audits as
well (with the exception of non-critical metadata like timestamps).

The audit may optionally include saving a copy of the outputs for
use in I<recycling> as described below.

=item Audited Objects

Any file created or modified by such an audited, deterministic process is known
as a B<derived object> or B<DO>. A B<DO> is a plain file like any
other; the only difference is that the AO database contains all relevant
information about how it was made, and optionally holds a full copy.

=item Recycling

B<Recycling> is a build optimization technique. Assume the existence of
a deterministic build tool along with reliable audits of prior builds,
including DOs, stored in a database. When the build tool is next run under
AO control, AO can stop just before each program is executed and
check whether the I<current> state of
the I<input set> matches that of any previous invocation. If
there is a match, we know precisely what the output(s) will be and that
we already have a copy of that data. In this situation, AO may choose to simply copy the
DOs from the matching previous run into place and exit, pretending the
program ran to completion though in fact it didn't. These DOs are said to
have been C<recycled>.

=item Avoidance and Reuse

B<Avoidance> is a degenerate case of recycling. Once a command has been
judged eligible for recycling, AO may find that the required output
files are already present. This can result, for instance, from two
consecutive builds without a I<clean> step in between. In this case even
the file copying can be skipped and the command is said to have been
C<avoided>, while the files in question are said to be C<reused>.

In summary, a I<DO> copied from the server is said to be I<recycled> whereas
if the file currently in place is tested, found correct, and simply left
in place we say it was I<reused>.

=back

When a B<build tool> is run under control of the B<ao> program the above
capabilities are added to it. Consider two compilations of a simple Hello
World program using GCC:

    % gcc -o hello hello.c
    % gcc -o hello hello.c
    
This will simply build the program twice, and the second build should take
approximately the same time as the first (generally slightly less due
to caches being warm). However, by prefixing the build steps with
B<ao run>:

    % ao run gcc -o hello hello.c
    % ao run gcc -o hello hello.c

The first build will be I<audited> and copies of its output stored.  It
will run somewhat slower due to the overhead of auditing.  When it
comes to the second build, B<AO> will discover that the inputs are
unchanged and will only pretend to run the compiler, actually copying in the
results of the first build instead. This is typically much faster, often
by orders of magnitude. Of course in real life clean builds don't usually
happen twice in a row without I<anything> changing in between, but other
team members are quite likely to build from the same input versions and
thus to be in a position to share output files.

Next, let's do the same thing with a makefile-based software project:

    % ao run make clean all
    % ao run make clean all

Each of these would normally remove and regenerate all target files but
with AO in use the second go-round simply I<recycles> the set from the
first run. The make program has no idea that AO is in use or that the
second run differs from the first; as far as it knows, it asked for
certain files to be rebuilt and they were.

Note that there's no special relationship between I<ao> and I<make>
here; any build tool would be handled the same way. For instance, any of
the following command lines would be audited and given the same
opportunities for build avoidance described above.

    ao run ant clean jar
    ao run ./build.sh
    ao run perl build.pl
    ao run c++ -o foo *.cpp

=head1 POST-MORTEM ANALYSIS

In addition to build speedups via recycling, B<ao> provides access to
the shared database in order to allow post-mortem analysis of builds,
using a set of I<user actions> as noted in the usage message.  A few
example commands are shown below. The syntax I<foo/bar> means that the
full action name is I<foobar> but it can be abbreviated as I<foo>.

The set of post-mortem commands is extensible. A full list of currently
supported actions can be obtained from the server via C<ao help>, and
detailed help for a specific action is generally availble with C<ao
help I<command>>. A very minimal subset is described here:

=over 4

=item ping

The I<ping> command attempts to contact the server. It prints the
server string in I<host:port> format if found, and prints an error message
otherwise.

=item lsp/rojects

The I<lsprojects> command, which may be abbreviated to I<lsp>, shows a list
of known projects.

=item lsb/uilds

The I<lsbuilds> command, which may be abbreviated as I<lsb>, lists all
builds which have occurred for the current or specified project.
Important attributes such as who, when, where, duration, etc. are also
displayed. If a file is given on the command line, the listing is limited
to builds which could have produced that file.

=item ls

A full description of the specified build and everything it did is printed. As with the
Unix utility after which it's named, the I<ls> action has many command line options.

=back

=head1 MAKEFILE GENERATION

There are a number of extant programs which attempt to determine which files
depend on which others (I<makedepends>, I<gcc -MD>, etc). Most of them
work by parsing the expected input files, assuming they're in a recognized
language, and attempting to determine what files they will open.
AO may be used to replace these tools. It can do a better job because it is
language independent and simply records files the program actually
opened rather than trying to predict what I<should> happen.

AO can generate either dependency data to be included in an existing Makefile,
or a full Makefile. The full-makefile feature can be used to replace a
creaky old build model with a clean, parallelizable, new system. This is
an advanced topic and is discussed in a separate document.

=head1 OPTIONS

The following options are supported I<for the ao program itself>.
There are actually two sets of options which may appear on an I<ao>
command line. Typical usage for a build might be:

    % ao I<ao-options> run program I<program-options>

and for a server action:

    % ao I<ao-options> action I<action-options>

Only the I<ao-options>, which affect the behavior of the I<ao> program
itself, are described here.

=over 4

=item -h|--help

Prints a short usage message summarizing the supported options.

=item -H|--properties

Dumps the current state of all documented properties.

=item -a|--absolute-paths

Cause all output file names to be represented as absolute paths.

=item -d|--download-only

Make no modifications to server state but continue to shop for download
possibilities. Also known as I<selfish mode> (take but don't give).

=item -MD|--make-depends

Generates full dependency information in Makefile format, in the form of
per-target Makefile fragments. These can be included in future builds.

This is actually a '-M' flag with an argument which is the desired
extension for Makefile fragments. For the benefit of those familiar with
the GCC -MD flag, it is generally documented as -MD and as a special case
the 'D' is down-cased to result in a .d extension. You could use, for
instance, -Mprq to request a .prq extension.

=item -F|--make-file

Generates a single, self-contained, non-recursive, working Makefile with
full dependency information. The Makefile is designed for GNU make by default.
If used in combination with I<--make-depends> the generated file will contain
only I<include> statements pulling in the dependency fragments.

=item -l|--log-file I<logfile>

Save all output to the specified logfile. This logfile is also promoted
to the server when done and stored with the build it describes.

=item -L|--log-file-temp

Similar to I<--log-file> but saves output to a temp file which is removed
after its contents are saved on the server.

=item -m|--members-only

Ignore files which are not project members.

=item -o|--output-file

Dump audit results into the specified output file.
B<NOTE: this option is special in that it suppresses
all server contact.>

=item -q|--quiet

Suppress UPLOAD/DOWNLOAD messages.

=item -s|--server I<server-string>

Specify an alternate server to communicate with. The server string is
in a composite I<host:port> form, e.g. mervyn:8283.

=item -T|--print-elapsed

Print a summary line with the elapsed time after the command is done.

=item -u|--upload-only

Don't bother shopping for downloads but do upload the audit and all
derived objects. Also known as I<martyr mode> (give but don't take).

=item -w|--why

When an object cannot be downloaded and must be built from scratch,
explain the failure to match.

=item -x|--exec-verbosity

Print each command line as executed. Similar to the Unix I<sh -x> flag.

=item -X|--execute-only

Skip all auditing and simply execute the command. This is useful in
debugging or benchmarking scenarios as it allows the command line to
stay unchanged while adding or subtracting auditing. Useful ancillary
features such as logfile handling and elapsed time summaries remain
enabled.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION

=head2 PROPERTIES OVERVIEW

The I<ao> program is configured via a set of properties.  Properties
may be set in .properties files, via the environment, or in some cases
via command-line flags. Though the I<ao> client is not written in Java,
its properties files follow the rules of Java properties. In particular
the format supports either of

    name = value
    name:  value

The command line flags described in OPTIONS are actually just an alternate way
to make property settings. In other words the I<-s> flag in this command

    ao -s localhost:8080 run make

is merely a convenient way of overriding the I<Server> property. Most
command-line flags map directly to a property, though only the more
commonly-used properties have an associated flag.

Properties may also be set via the environment. The translation from a
property name to an environment variable name involves converting to
upper case, replacing all non-alphanumeric characters with an
underscore, and prepending "AO_". Thus the property I<Project.Name> may
be overridden with the environment variable I<AO_PROJECT_NAME>.

Property settings are subject to a precedence order. From highest
precedence to lowest:

    Command-line flag
    Environment
    Project properties (see PROJECTS below)
    Personal properties ($HOME/ao.properties or %HOMEPATH%\ao.properties)
    Site-wide properties (global ao.properties)

Property names are not case sensitive. However, the convention is to
use mixed case with '.' as the word separator, e.g. Server or
Project.Name.

Properties are generally either string-, numeric-, or boolean-valued.
Some string-valued properties specify regular expressions; by convention,
these have names which end with ".RE".

Special note for regular-expression properties: the regex should I<not>
be delimited with // or anything else, nor do special characters such
as \ need to be escaped. Sample setting:

    Foo.Bar.RE = \.c$

This specifies a regular expression which would match all filenames
ending with ".c".

The set of documented properties and their current values may be seen by running

    ao --properties
    
This also shows the set of files from which properties are being read. A less
verbose listing may be obtained by adding I<--quiet>.

=head2 PROPERTIES DETAILS

Following is a description of some of the most common property
settings available to AO users. This list may be incomplete or
out of date; use "ao --properties" to see the definitive set.

=over 4

=item * Absolute.Paths (Boolean)

Causes the paths of member files to be printed in fully-qualified form.
Normally member files are displayed relative to the project root.

The following aggregation properties operate as a group. They are
discussed in more detail below under CANCELLATION AND AGGREGATION.

=over 4

=item * Aggregation.Prog.Strong.RE (Regex)

An aggregation pattern applied to the program's basename. This is a
I<strong> match; an aggregation group formed by a I<strong> pattern
cannot be disbanded except by a match on a I<Break> pattern.

=item * Aggregation.Prog.Weak.RE (Regex)

Similar to I<Aggregation.Prog.Strong.RE> except that the grouping
is I<weak> or provisional; if a child command matches an
aggregation pattern then the aggregation group based on the outer
weak pattern is I<disbanded>.

=item * Aggregation.Prog.Break.RE (Regex)

An aggregation pattern applied to the program's basename which forces
the current aggregation group to be disbanded regardless of its
strength.

=item * Aggregation.Line.Strong.RE (Regex)

Similar to I<Aggregation.Line.Strong.RE> except that the pattern is
applied to the entire command line rather than the program name.

=item * Aggregation.Line.Weak.RE (Regex)

Similar to I<Aggregation.Line.Weak.RE> except that the pattern is
applied to the entire command line rather than the program name.

=item * Aggregation.Line.Break.RE (Regex)

Similar to I<Aggregation.Line.Break> except that the pattern is
applied to the entire command line rather than the program name.

=back

=item * Audit.Only (Boolean)

If true, records only metadata with the server. File contents are
neither stored nor retrieved.

=item * Base.Dir (String)

Automatically set to the base directory of the current project.
I<This property is special because it is not user settable. Instead, it is
derived from the location of the project config dir, defaulting
to the current working directory.>

=item * Download.Only (Boolean)

AKA I<Selfish Mode>. Causes the client to take but not give. In
other words, matching derived objects may be downloaded but no
results will be uploaded.

=item * Execute.Only (Boolean)

Simply executes the command without any auditing. Primarily useful in
debugging or benchmarking scenarios.

=item * Log.File (String)

Causes the output of the project transaction to be logged to the named
file, and the result stored on the server side where it can be
retrieved via the I<logfile> action.

=item * Log.file.Temp (Boolean)

Sets the B<Log.File> to a temp file which is removed after its contents
are uploaded to the server.

=item * Output.File (String)

If set, causes I<raw> audit data to be written to the named file,
suppressing all server communication. Primarily for debugging.

=item * Print.Elapsed (Integer)

If nonzero, prints a line summarizing the elapsed time before exiting,
but only if the elapsed time was greater than the value (in seconds). For
example, a value of 10 would cause the elapsed time to be shown for any
command lasting more than 10 seconds.

=item * Project.Name (String)

The name by which the current project should be known. Defaults to the
basename of the B<Base.Dir> value.

=item * PTX.Strategy (String)

Controls how far back in history AO will look for reuse opportunities. The
format is "T.L.U.H" where

=over 4

=item * T

is the I<total maximum> number of PTXes to be examined.

=item * L

is the maximum number of I<labeled> PTXes to be examined.

=item * U

is the maximum number of PTXes I<by the current user> to be examined.

=item * H

is the maximum number of PTXes I<from the current host> to be examined.

=back

PTXes are ordered from most recent to least and the value -1 means "no
limit". Therefore a string '30,-1,10,15' means "Consider the most
recent 10 PTXes made by me, the most recent 15 made on the
current host, plus an unlimited number of I<labeled> PTXes but not to
exceed 30 in total.

=item * Server (String, Required)

Provides the server address in I<hostname:port> format, e.g.
"localhost:8080". B<This is the only property which does not
default reasonably; you must set the Server property in order to find a
server.>

=item * Shop.Ignore.Path.RE (Regex)

Supplies a Perl-style regular expression which causes matched files to
be ignored for shopping. Thus a value like the following would exclude
all files under /usr/include from shopping consideration.

    Shop.Ignore.Path.RE = ^/usr/include/

=item * Shop.Members.Only (Boolean)

If set, causes only project member files to be considered during
shopping. This may be helpful when, for instance, the compiler suite
may be installed in different places on different machines.  Or when
you don't care about minor differences in the compiler suite.

=item * Upload.Only (Boolean)

AKA I<Martyr Mode>. Causes the client to give but not take. In
other words it will contribute its results to the common cause but
will not partake of reuse itself.

=item * Upload.Reads (Boolean)

If set, causes the contents of B<all> involved files to be uploaded.  By
default, only files I<written to> are uploaded.

=item * Verbosity (String)

Determines the verbosity level. Recognized terms include "OFF" (for
no verbosity) and "STD" (the default). Run "ao -v?" for a full list
of allowed terms. These may be grouped using comma separators, for
instance:

    Verbosity = STD,EXEC

=back

=head2 CANCELLATION AND AGGREGATION

AO audits the actions of I<every single program> run within its control.
This level of granularity is generally more than is wanted.
A compiler, for instance, may under the covers invoke a number
of separate programs (preprocessor, optimizer, linker, etc) which
pass data between themselves in temp files.
Comparing input sets of these programs from one
run to the next is often impossible since the names of the intermediate
temp files change each time, and are removed after use anyway. It's better to treat the
compiler as a "black box" and ignore the details of its implementation.

More generally, the finest level of granularity desired is that which consists
of well-defined inputs and outputs. Even more generally, the user should be
able to customize the granularity. The solution involves two related techniques
known as "cancellation" and "aggregation".

Cancellation is the removal of unnecessary or redundant file audit records I<within>
a single program. A program might create a file, write to it one or more times,
read back the results, remove the file and exit. Since the file did not exist at
entry or exit, the fact that it was created and removed is an implementation detail
which need not be reported. This is cancellation; each program's audit is subjected
to cancellation before its results are reported.

Aggregation is the identification of higher-level clusters of programs to act
as black boxes, such as the compiler in the example above. Once these clusters
have been identified and glued together a process similar to cancellation is employed
to remove file accesses which feature in neither input nor output sets.

The identification of aggregation clusters is done via regular expressions (REs). It's a
bit of a black art, though fortunately the default expressions are reasonably stable and
fine for the average build. On the other hand it may be possible to improve your
auditing substantially by tweaking the REs for your specific needs. Following is an
overview:

First, note that AO keeps track of both the program name and the full command line for
each command run. We can look at I<either> of these to make aggregation decisions. Thus
there are two sets of REs, one applied to programs and the other to command lines.

Consider a make-based build in which make decides to run the command "gcc -c foo.c".
Generally make does not run this command directly; instead it uses the shell so
that the resulting command is something like I</bin/sh -c "gcc -c foo.c">. These are
two different programs (sh and gcc) which we want to consider as one. So we write an
RE to match the I<program name> /bin/sh such that it and gcc (and any subcommands run by gcc)
are aggregated.

However, what if this is a "recursive" design where make also invokes a child make?
In this case the resulting command would be I</bin/sh -c "make">. Clearly it would be a bad
idea to match /bin/sh in the same way here because the entire child make would be aggregated
into a single unit. This would be far too coarse-grained.

The solution chosen involved two different kinds of aggregation: I<strong> and I<weak>.
A strong aggregation is never broken; once a command is chosen for strong aggregation,
all its children will be part of that unit. A weak aggregation is broken, or
I<disbanded>, when one of its children matches another aggregation RE. In other words
a weak aggregation is provisional; it lasts only until a finer-grained aggregation unit
displaces it.

The result would be four regular expressions: a strong and a weak for each of program
and command line. However, this original set has more recently been supplemented by two
more expressions known as I<break> REs which I<force> the disbanding of an aggregation unit
(strong or weak) if matched. In the I<make> example above we can use a break RE to ensure
that a child make is B<always> disaggregated.

The final tally is six regular expressions:

    Aggregation.Prog.Strong.RE
    Aggregation.Prog.Weak.RE
    Aggregation.Prog.Break.RE
    Aggregation.Line.Strong.RE
    Aggregation.Line.Weak.RE
    Aggregation.Line.Break.RE

The shipped defaults basically say "do strong aggregations on compilers, weak
aggregations on shells, and always break on a child make". They should work
reasonably well for make-based compile-and-link builds but it will often be
possible to tune them for a particular build.
For instance, if you have a shell script which generates a source file by
running lots of little shell utilities such as awk, sed, cat, nm, etc it may
make sense to aggregate that script into an atomic unit for audit purposes. The shipped
defaults contain an aggregation for "libtool" which is a popular shell script of
this type.

The process of bundling and disbanding can be observed by setting the "AG" verbosity
bit, e.g. by passing the -vAG flag to I<ao>.

=head2 PROJECTS

AO divides all its work into I<projects>. Among the first things the
I<ao> program does at startup is attempt to determine its current
I<project context> by setting the two critical properties
I<Base.Dir> and I<Project.Name>. The algorithm is described here.

At startup the AO client walks from the current working directory
upward toward the filesystem root looking for a configuration
directory called C<.ao>. Once found, the directory containing
this config dir is assigned to the Base.Dir property. Next,
if the config dir contains a file named C<ao.properties>,
project-specific properties are read in from it.

The Base.Dir folder is considered the boundary between a
project and the "outside world". Files located within the tree
defined by this boundary are called "members" of the project, and those
outside it are called "non-members". Member files are given a
I<project relative pathname> or PRP which is their path from the
Base.Dir directory. Non-members are always referred
to by their absolute path.

Note that Base.Dir is never set explicitly. Rather, it is inferred from
the placement of the project config dir. If no such folder is found,
I<ao> behaves as if it was found in the CWD, thus making the CWD
automatically the base directory. This feature is not robust, not recommended
for production use, and may be removed in future versions. It is, however,
convenient for testing or demo situations.

The project properties file may set Project.Name explicitly. Otherwise,
it defaults to the basename of the Base.Dir value. Note that
project's config dir need not have any contents; even an empty folder
will establish both the Base.Dir and Project.Name properties.

To take a concrete example: imagine building Perl in the Unix directory
/scratch/src/perl-5.8.8.  You could work without any explicit project config,
resulting in the following implicit settings:

    Base.Dir     = /scratch/src/perl-5.8.8
    Project.Name = perl-5.8.8

But what if you were to cd into the "./utils" subdirectory and work
there for a while? Without a fixed base dir, I<ao> would now
think you were in a different project called "utils" and all previous
analysis and recycling opportunities are lost. The solution is to
create an empty config dir I</scratch/src/perl-5.8.8/.ao> to fix
the boundary explicitly. This would lock in the values above for any
working directory within the project tree.

However, perhaps a colleague is also working on perl-5.8.8 but chose to
place the source in a directory with a different basename,  say
"/home/colleague/src/perl". Or maybe someone is working on perl-5.8.9 and wants to
be able to share the parts that haven't changed. Or you simply don't feel
that a version number should be part of the project name. For all these
reasons it's best to set the project name explicitly by adding the following
to the project properties file:

    Project.Name = Perl

Now the project has a more consistent and publically palatable name.
Note that this is a somewhat synthetic example which assumes each user
manages their own project configuration. In real life the entire project,
including the AO project properties file, will most commonly be under source control
with different branches for 5.8.8 and 5.8.9. In that case the property
file will express common project policies and will be the same for all
participants.

=head1 EXAMPLES

    ao --help

Prints the set of options to the client program.

    ao --properties

Prints the current set of defined properties and their values.

    ao ping

Checks for a server and reports its location.

    ao help

Speaks to the server and prints a summary of available user actions.

    ao run I<command> ...

Runs the specified command line with auditing turned on.

=head1 LIMITATIONS

The AO tool depends on being able to insert its own code into foreign
programs, which in turn depends on certain semantics of the runtime
linker. This design has a few minor limitations of which the user
should be aware:

=head2 HEISENBERGIAN ISSUES

The layman's formulation of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle is
that I<the act of observing an action changes it such that there is no
longer a way to determine how it would have behaved if unobserved>.
A few analogous caveats apply to AO:

=over 4

=item 1. Performance

Auditing a program will slow it down somewhat. The effect of the
auditing per se is small but when server communication latency is
factored in, the overall impact is usually in the vicinity of 5-20
percent. Many factors (network bandwidth, size of generated files,
etc.) can affect this.

=item 2. File Descriptors

Each process starts with a certain fixed number of available file
descriptors. The exact number is OS- and configuration-dependent.
Because the audit trace is written to a file or socket, an audited
program may have one less file descriptor available for its own use.

=back

=head2 DETERMINISM

The AO design is predicated on the assumption that audited commands
are I<deterministic>, i.e. that the same command run
repeatedly with the same file inputs will produce
the same file outputs each time.  While it is certainly possible to
audit non-deterministic commands, less-than-useful results are
likely.  Consider the simple Unix command C<date E<gt> foo>; this
produces different output each time and will result in broken
recycling behavior.

In general, datestamps fail the determinism test and should be
avoided.  However, AO contains special-case code to ignore the embedded
datestamps in certain common file formats such as archive (.a) files on Unix
and PE/COFF (.exe, .dll, .lib, and .obj) files on Windows, as well as
.zip and .jar files on all platforms.

=head1 FILES

    $HOME/.ao.properties
    [Base.Dir]/.ao/ao.properties
    [Install.Dir]/etc/ao.properties

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2002-2011 David Boyce. All rights reserved.

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as
published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the
License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU Affero General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
